There was a famous and now-corrected mistake in medicine, when it became
typical to recommend that women take hormone replacement therapy (HRT) after
the menopause, in order to prevent *coronary heart disease*.  Coronary heart
disease is disease of the blood vessels of the heart, leading to blockage of
the vessels, and heart attacks.

HRT to prevent heart disease was *preventive HRT*.

There were two common options for HRT: the hormone *estrogen* alone, or
estrogen in combination with *progestin*.  Estrogen and progesterone are two of
the major female sex hormones, and progestin is a synthetic analogue of
progesterone.  Women lose both estrogen and progesterone when they go through
menopause, so HRT *replaces* these hormones.

The common recommendation to take HRT for prevention of coronary heart disease
came about, in part, because of a large review of all the evidence available in
1992, by Grady *et al*: [Hormone therapy to prevent disease and prolong life in
postmenopausal
women](https://pdp.sjsu.edu/faculty/gerstman/misc/Grady1992.pdf).

The abstract from this review includes:

> There is evidence that estrogen therapy decreases risk for coronary artery
disease ...

and concludes that:

> Hormone therapy should probably be recommended for women ... with coronary
heart disease or those at high risk for coronary heart disease.

The review was of data from *observational* studies, comparing women who were
taking HRT, for some reason, compared to those who were not.

In 2002, the Women's Health Initiative group [published a large *randomized*
trial of preventive
HRT](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/195120).  In this trial,
instead of looking at women who happened to take HRT, or not, they *randomized*
women into two groups, one group of 8506 women taking HRT, and the other group
of 8102 who took a placebo. They found an *increased* risk of coronary heart
disease and stroke in the HRT group.

This changed the standard recommendation that doctors were giving about HRT,
but in the meantime, millions of women had been taking HRT on the advice of
their doctors, and some of these would have been harmed as a result.

Please:

* Read the original 1992 review.
* Read the 2002 randomized trial.

Now imagine yourself as a doctor in 1992. You are a careful reader of clinical
trials, and you have read the 1992 paper.

* How would you have responded to the paper?  To the authors â€” perhaps in
  a letter to the journal that published the review?  To your patients, asking
  about HRT?
* If you were on a committee thinking about recommendations for HRT, what would
  *your* recommendations have been?  And how would you have persuaded your
  colleagues of your recommendations?

We will discuss this in class at the end of the week.
